In this lecture, you'll learn about virtualization, which is one of the main enablers of cloud computing.
It allows for resource pooling where multiple customers are internal departments share the same underlying
hardware and virtualization has been around a lot longer than cloud computing has.
This lecture focuses on server virtualization because that was the first type available.
But the same principle I'll cover here can be applied to virtualize network infrastructure devices as
well.
I don't give you some examples of those in the next lecture.
So looking at our diagram here, this is the Three-tier e commerce application that we worked through
as a case study in the previous lecture, you can see that we've got the firewalls front connecting
to the Internet behind you.
We've got load balancers balance for incoming connections through our front end Web servers behind there.
And we've got the application middleware servers.
And at the back end, we've got the database servers and everything is tied together with our network
infrastructure devices of our writers and our switches.
So when we build the solution on cloud, this is how it's going to look and behave logically.
But it's not actually running on dedicated physical hardware devices.
The underlying devices are going to be shared with other customers or departments as well.
So the cloud provider does not provision separate dedicated physical hardware for every customer it's
shared.
A customer can sometimes deploy some selected dedicated hardware devices, additional cost depending
on the cloud provider you're going with.
Some will give you that option.
Some will not.
So let's look at what we had before virtualization.
Let's see, we're looking at a small company here and we go down to their server room.
We'll find the rock and indie rock.
They've got, for example, a Web server, a database server and an e-mail server for consistent power
will use Upshaw's uninterruptible power supplies for the network connectivity, but will be switches
on or and a firewall in the rock and noticed that here everything is running on separate dedicated hardware.
So if we look at the architecture of this and the blue box here represents a physical server, so in
server down at the bottom here, we've got the physical components in there, like the processor, the
raw mammone, the network card, the hard drive, et cetera.
And then the operating system runs on top of there.
And then on top of the operating system, we install the application.
For example, the first server is our email server.
So that's how the email server is going to look from an architectural point of view.
We're going to have the same for the database server, the same for the Web server, and all three of
them are running on their own separate physical boxes.
And a problem with this is if you look at the server utilization, it's going to be down around 15,
20 percent, normally something like that.
And when actually the utilization I mean, how busy the CPU is, how much memory we're using, how much
of the potential of the hard drive, the network card, etc. So we're really not getting good utilization
at all.
A lot of the potential power to the server is being wasted and you have to pay for each separate server.
You have to buy that server.
And you're also all using power, space and cooling, which is costing money as well.
So it's really not cost efficient.
So how could we get better efficiency from our server?
Well, the first week you might think of doing it, looking at the box here again.
This is a single server.
We've got the CPU, the RAM, and on the bottom we install the operating system on server.
And what we could do is we could run our email server application, our database server application
and our Web server application all on top of the same operating system on the same box.
But doing multiple applications on the same server is terrible practice.
It would give us better utilization if it was running at 15 percent each before.
Maybe we're going to be up at 45 percent utilization now.
But it's bad practice because if we have a problem with any one of those applications, it's liable
to crash all of them.
So you never do this.
So is there a better way to do it?
And the answer is yes, we can use server virtualization.
So this is going to look a little similar to the previous example.
But you'll see that there's a key difference to the blue box.
Here is our single physical server box.
Again, we've got the physical components down at the bottom, CPU, The Ram Vinik, etc., and installing
a normal operating system on there, like Windows or Linux, we install a hypervisor on top of the physical
hardware.
I'll talk a bit more about what the hypervisor does in a second.
For now, you can think of it as running as an operating system.
Then on top of the hypervisor, we install a virtual machine and it's not virtual machine.
It's got its own operating system, which is windows in this example and also the application, which
was our email server.
We then install a second virtual machine, which has got its own separate operating system, which is
windows again in this example.
But it's a separate instance of windows.
And on top of our operating system, we install our second application, which was the database server.
Then we install our third virtual machine on there.
We install its operating system, which is Linux, for example.
And on top of there, we install the Web server.
So you can see the difference from the previous example.
In the previous example, we just had one operating system and we were running all of our applications.
On top of that here we've got three separate instances of the operating system and each of these separate
instances should be separate virtual machines.
Oxenham behaves as if it was a separate physical server.
So if there's a problem in one of the applications, it's only going to affect that virtual machine.
It's not going to affect the other virtual machines.
So we don't have that bad practice issue that we had in the previous example.
But we got all the benefits now of running multiple virtual machines on top of one piece of physical
hardware.
So if you look at the utilization, you're going to get much better utilization, which gives you much
better cost efficiency.
OK, for example, there was a type one bare metal hypervisor and type one hypervisor was run directly
on this system hardware.
So this is go back again.
You can see the hypervisor is running on top of the hardware.
It's acting is the operating system.
The other thing it does is it gives out the access to the underlying hardware.
Who, the virtual machines that are running on top of it, it's in charge of making sure that they all
get their fair share of the underlying hardware.
Popular software, which is type one hypervisor, is VMware ESX High that runs on the physical box,
the physical server itself, which is known as the host and VM VMware is such operating system.
The host that's part of the Vesuvio Suite in VMware of a popular type one hypervisor are Microsoft hypervisor,
redhot KVAMME Optical VMS server on Citrix Xang Server.
There are old school type two hypervisor as well, which are not used in the data center, but I'm going
to cover them here to save any confusion.
Type two hypervisor is run on top of a host operating system.
And examples of these are VMware Workstation, VMware player and VMware Fusion for Mac, VMware workstations
for Windows, Virtual Box, Camu and Pottow else.
So let's look at the different architecture with a Type two hypervisor.
Here we've got the physical box, which is probably going to be your workstation or your laptop.
We've got the underlying physical resources there.
Then on top of that, we don't install the hypervisor directly onto the hardware.
We've got our normal desktop operating system like Windows or Linux or Mac here.
Then on our normal desktop operating system, we've got our normal applications like Microsoft Office,
our Web browser, etc. and then also on top of the desktop operating system, we install the hypervisor
on there.
Then within that hypervisor we can run our different virtual machines, which will have their own separate
operating systems and applications.
So my laptop that I'm recording this on is actually got a type two hypervisor installed on it.
I've got VMware workstation player on here and I've already started up a virtual machine, so I'll just
open that for you.
You can see I'm running on windows, but my virtual machine is actually a Linux box.
So what this would be useful for is, well, I'm an instructor.
Let's see that I go to a customer site to do some training, but I'm going to be doing training on Linux
this week.
I don't want to carry a Windows laptop with my presentation on it and a separate Linux laptop that I
can do the demonstrations on by running a Type two hypervisor.
I just take my one laptop.
I can use the Windows operating system to show my PowerPoint presentations.
And within VMware I can open up my Linux virtual machine so I can show that as well.
So what a Type two hypervisor is really useful for is for doing lab tests or lab demos, that kind of
thing.
So let's compare the two.
You see the type one hypervisor they are the hypervisor is running directly on top of the hardware.
And then we have our virtual machines running on top of there with the type two hypervisor.
We've got a normal desktop operating system on top of the hardware and then our other normal applications.
And we also install a hypervisor in the operating system as well.
So where would you use one or the other?
You would use a type one hypervisor and a data center because there's less and layers there between
the virtual machines and the hardware.
This is this is really built for datacenter environments where you're dedicating that physical server
horse to be used for data center servers.
And because we don't have extra layer there, you're going to get better performance with the type two
hypervisor.
There's an extra layer between the virtual machines and the underlying hardware there.
We've got the hypervisor and a normal desktop operating system.
So this would be used when you've got a normal laptop that that's what you're going to be normally using
it for.
And you also want to do some lab testing or some lab demos as well.
And it gives you the convenience of being able to run it on your laptop.
OK, that was our server virtualization.
But let me just skip back a whole bunch right here to our case study that we covered earlier as well.
I must be just about there.
OK, here we go.
So go ahead eventually with our case study, you see the servers we had our front end Web servers,
an application, middleware servers and our backend database servers.
Those are not dedicated to Osh and also Lewen.
When we are the customer of the cloud provider, our servers are going to be running as virtual machines
and is going to be our customers virtual machines running on the same underlying hardware as well.
That obviously cuts the cost down and the cloud provider can pass those cost savings onto us.
Some cloud providers do allow you to have your own dedicated server hardware dedicated just for you,
but it's going to be a much more expensive option to do that.
OK, that's everything I needed to cover here.
See you in the next lecture where I'll talk about virtualizing networked devices.